ABRT integration test suite documentation
=========================================
:Author: Richard Marko <rmarko@redhat.com>
:Description: Since 2011, `ABRT <https://fedorahosted.org/abrt/>`_ is using `BeakerLib library <https://fedorahosted.org/beakerlib/>`_ based test suite for integration testing. This document describes the usage and the architecture of the test suite.

.. contents:: Table of Contents

About
-----

At the time of writing this document, we have 32 tests which tests `ABRT <https://fedorahosted.org/abrt/>`_, `libreport <https://fedorahosted.org/libreport/>`_ and `btparser <https://fedorahosted.org/btparser/>`_.
These tests are run nightly for each of the currently supported releases of Fedora and Red Hat Enterprise Linux. You can find the results on our `public mirror <http://rmarko.fedorapeople.org/abrt/>`_.


Running the test suite
----------------------

.. caution::
        Don't run the test suite on your machine **directly**, use virtual machine or machine dedicated for the testing.

In your virtual machine or dedicated machine:
 - clone the ABRT repository: *git clone git://git.fedorahosted.org/abrt.git*
 - go to *abrt/tests/runtest/*
 - run *./run*

This will run all the tests in order specified in *./aux/test_order*. When the testing
is done, the output can be found in */tmp/abrt-testsuite/*.

To override the destination
directory or the other options, you can edit *./aux/config.sh*.

Running single test
'''''''''''''''''''

To run only one of the tests, you have to run it via *./aux/runner.sh*. This script prepares
your system by starting *abrtd*.

For example, to run *dbus-api* test, you have to pass the whole path to *runtest.sh* to *runner.sh*::

        ./aux/runner.sh dbus-api/runtest.sh

If you don't need to start/stop *abrtd* for each run
(if it's already running in your system) you can also
run the *runtest.sh* directly.


Running only a subset of the tests
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

To run only part of the tests, edit *./aux/test_order* file and comment out the tests you don't
want to run.

For example, when using the test suite to test already installed packages, you don't need
to build and install git versions. In this case, you can comment out *abrt-nightly-build* test
and all the *\*-make-check* tests.

Writing new test
----------------

To create a new test you have to:
 - create a directory reflecting its name
 - create two files in that directory:

   * executable runtest.sh file
   * PURPOSE file
 - add the test to *./aux/test_order*

The tests are written in bash using `BeakerLib library <https://fedorahosted.org/beakerlib/>`_. BeakerLib Quick Reference [`PDF <https://fedorahosted.org/beakerlib/attachment/wiki/Download/BeakerLib%20Quick%20Reference.pdf?format=raw>`_] is what you need.

It's always good to copy one of the existing tests as a base for your test. Good candidates are:
 - run-abrtd which basically serves as an example,
 - ccpp-plugin if you need to test crash handling (if you require crash directory),
 - dbus-api if you need to test dbus functionality.


Complex tests
'''''''''''''

Please provide an explanation for complex tests. Either explain certain sections of the
test in comments in *runtest.sh* or create *README* file inside the directory of the test.

Output directory structure
--------------------------

To avoid painful digging in several distinct files logging is now divided
into several logical levels:

`$OUTPUT_ROOT` variable is defined in `aux/config.sh` which represents the root
for all logs.

For each stage of the test suite run there is corresponding directory in root directory.
It contains `stage.log` file which contains output of script governing the stage.

::

        /tmp/abrt-testsuite
        ├── format/
        ├── post/
        ├── pre/
        ├── report/
        ├── results
        └── test/

Stages:
'''''''
 - PRE
        install required packages, collect log files, collect system information
 - TEST
        run all the tests
 - FORMAT
        format the results for REPORT stage
 - REPORT
        report the results
 - POST
        collect logs, cleanup

For TEST stage there is an additional subdirectory for each test case:

::

        /tmp/abrt-testsuite/test/
        ├── abrt-make-check
        ├── abrt-nightly-build
        ├── abrt-should-return-rating-0-on-fail
        ├── blacklisted-package
        ...

Each directory contains several files:

::

        /tmp/abrt-testsuite/test/systemd-init/
        ├── dmesg
        ├── avc
        ├── fail.log
        ├── full.log
        ├── messages
        └── protocol.log

Only `full.log` is mandatory. It contains stdout and stderr of the test run.
`protocol.log` only contains the protocol generated by BeakerLib. If the test
fails with FATAL error, `protocol.log` is not generated. In case of other failures,
these are extracted to `fail.log` along with line numbers pointing to lines in `full.log`.

`dmesg`, `messages` and `avc` each contains log file messages written during the test run.

Helper files
------------

Several helper files and scripts are stored in *abrt/tests/helpers* directory. These
includes kickstarts for Fedora.

Using virt-install to install virtual machine
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

First you need to prepare your kickstart file. Use one of the available kickstarts
and run::

  ksflatten fedora_16.kickstart.cfg > custom.ks

*ksflatten* utility is provided by *pykickstart* package.

Afterwards yo can use following *virt-install* command to install your virtual machine

::

  virt-install --name "abrt-testing" --ram "1222" \
    --connect qemu:///system \
    --location "http://download.fedoraproject.org/pub/fedora/linux/releases/16/Fedora/x86_64/os/" \
    --disk path=/var/lib/libvirt/images/abrt-testing.img,size=4,sparse=true \
    --accelerate \
    --initrd-inject=./custom.ks \
    --extra-args "ks=file:/custom.ks" \
    --graphics type=vnc \
    --noautoconsole

For this to work, you need *qemu:///system* access and *virt-install* utility,
provided by *python-virtinst* package. To allow non-root users access to *qemu:///system*
you need to create *policykit* file with following contents:

::

        # cat /etc/polkit-1/localauthority/50-local.d/org.libvirt.unix.manage.pkla
        [Allow user to manage virtual machines]
        Identity=unix-user:your_user_name
        Action=org.libvirt.unix.manage
        ResultAny=yes
        ResultInactive=yes
        ResultActive=yes

and make sure you use replace *your_user_name* with the username you use. Alternatively you
can allow group access using *unix-group:your_group_name*.

After you run the *virt-install* command you can watch the progress of the installation by running:

::

        vncviewer localhost

After the installation is done, proceed with `Running the test suite`_.
